Yes.
Good afternoon, gentlemen.
Just now there's three seats there,
or how many are you, how many
of you're considering submitting?
Uh, There'll be, uh, probably four of us.
Well, we can grab another chair in for the four.
Uh, we could, we could we'll fit another chair in there.
Three out bishops, but four petitioners.
Can we just grab, can we just grab another chair's
Gonna be five. Oh
yeah. Do you mind if we, um, video?
That's fine. So, um,
this is actually, um, saying that, can I just say
for the request to video that, um,
it is actually live streamed, this is a live video anyway.
Um, so it'll be actually live streamed.
So we're, we're now actually live.
Okay. All right.
Now welcome to our submitters. Um, I thank you.
Um, now I just introduce the committee.
I'm Greg Oy, chair of the committee.
Greg Fleming. Carl member Parliament for
Menez Green Party based in tam.
Alright, now, thank you.
So now we, we have you for 10 minutes for your submission.
You can take everything, um, as read.
Um, so we look forward to hearing from you.
Now, it would be good if we could have, um,
time for questions at the end.
Um, we are relatively restricted for time
'cause we do have other submitters on other topics coming
after you who are waiting, which is why we do have to, um,
sort of keep things moving.
So, um, Mr. Re
Is it? Who's
the Oh, right.
For Patrick Nichols.
So, uh, this is my son-in-Law Nicholas,
who was just acknowledging the other two presenters, uh,
of the petition who have now deceased.
And I find it quite extraordinary
that their names have been rubbed off the petition
as my name is left.
Um, somewhat lonely in that.
So, um, thank you for this opportunity.
On February the sixth, 1840,
Lieutenant Governor Hobson committed the crown to tki.
Um, do you mind sitting, sitting down,
sorry, on the thing is that all?
Sorry.
On February the sixth, 1840,
Lieutenant Governor Hobson committed the crown to TKI
or to care for the various expressions of faith in the land.
At that time, Anglican Methodist, Roman Catholic,
and Maori.
The undisputed eyewitness account by William Colenzo
recorded the conversation between the Roman Catholic Bishop,
uh, Poel, the CMS leader, translator,
and mediator of the treaty, Henry Williams
and Lieutenant Governor Hobson.
The Crown representative Colenzo records
the question from Pel to Lieutenant Governor Hobson,
that the natives might be informed that all
who should join the Catholic religion should have the
protection of the British government.
This initiated an immediate conversation
between Henry Williams.
He consulted with the governor.
It is then recorded that Hobson responded
most certainly,
and he expressed his regret
that Pel had not made known his wish earlier, as
his desire would have been embodied in the treaty.
Williams inquired whether the same protection would be
afforded to all the faiths
on receiving an affirmative response.
He took some paper and he wrote the addition to the treaty,
and he read aloud,
or
the governor says, the several faiths of England,
of the Wesleyans of Rome
and the Maori custom shall alike be protected by them.
It is also important to note that for the ma majority of ran
the whole event was an oral event.
They agreed to by what they had heard via Henry Williams,
not what they had studied and read with their lawyers.
Williams read aloud and explained
and recommended the treaty in Terrell Maori, the same way
that he read and explained in Terre Maori the fourth
article, honorable Members of Parliament.
It's not my intention this afternoon
to traverse the possible repercussions of the Crown's oral
and recorded commitment
to the assembly at Waitangi on the 6th of February, except
to say that earlier references
to the oral article in the House
and other associated opinions given
to mps have in my mind completely missed the point.
Firstly, there is a large difference
between guaranteeing religious freedom
and the commitments to tki,
but that argument for another day.
And secondly, the possible repercussions
of recognition are not your primary concern.
The fundamental question is, did Hobson commit the crown
to active protection of the fledgling nation
nation's wa at Ang?
That's the fundamental question.
We've come here this afternoon to Bess you to ensure
that the Crown's oral commitment at
that seminal hui on February the sixth is
acknowledged and honored.
I argue that an oral commitment has the same moral, legal,
and constitutional weight as a written agreement,
especially in the context of a covenant entered into, uh,
as a covenant entered into with a largely oral people
that is te iwi Maori.
I propose that in the same way
that an oral agreement is recognized
and upheld by the Crown on the occasion of a marriage,
and in many contractual verbal, a a a agreements so
to the unique verbal agreement by the Crown
to the various denominations
and ran Maori needs to be upheld,
either seeks the committee to give this permission,
this petition, the life and the heir that it deserves.
In the midst of the current debate within
and without Parliament about the treaty
and the unhelpful lacuna of visionary leadership,
the members ought to demonstrate the required courage
and leadership and provide an avenue
for the appropriate consideration of the oral article.
An article that is already recognized in an ad hoc way
by some of your own departments.
I shall now call upon the four representatives
of the various, or to make a one minute statement, uh,
before you in support of the petition.
Uh, my name is Reverend Peter Taylor, the pr uh,
p president of the Methodist Church in New Zealand.
Ano the Methodist Church in New Zealand has
for just over 40 years been on a spiritual
and practical journey involving an equal sharing of power
between Tang UA and Tang.
Whilst not without its twists
and turns, the journey has led to an understanding, sharing
and trusting of each partner to the other.
And we believe that honoring Titi in this way has been good
for both partners
and believe as it has been good for the church,
it will also be good for the nation as President.
I urge the inclusion of the fourth oral article as honoring
to ti in its wholeness trustee will help heal
and bring wholeness to our country.
Maori, uh, also I'm the Archbishop, uh,
and Polynesia, New Zealand Archbishop, uh,
called Justin Duck with, uh, my first time as a bishop,
I went to Ana when I was there.
In the, literally was said to me, when are you,
as the church, as the midwife of the treaty,
gonna take responsibility as the midwife.
And so I, I sit here today supporting the Kopa
because I believe that the church, the anchor church,
all the churches, we had a special place, the beginning
of the treaty where we were the translators,
we were the propagators.
And in many senses, Maori often took our word along the way
for the commitment to the treaty.
And so for us to have been at that pivotal moment
where the fourth article was, was agreed to orally, uh,
I feel it's we have to continue to stand in that gap always
and say, look, this is what we agreed to.
This is what we think is important,
and as people, uh, we need to honor that.
So I stand here for that as a church in 1992,
we structured ourselves according to the treaty.
So as Anan Church in Alter, we, we structure, uh, uh,
by trying to put the treaty into life in
that sense in a structural sense.
So we have in many sense embedded
that in a very meaningful sense in our own life together.
So I support KO today.
Um, my name's Rebecca Packer.
I'm her Chief Executive of the Sisters
of the Compassion Group.
Uh, privileged to be here supporting this petition.
Um, I'm also a deacon in the Ang Church
here in the Wilmington diocese.
So come with a medical view cover
Basis.
Um, so this is a Compassion is easier.
First, first Homegrown Catholic Order, uh, founded
by a medical hip Susan Bear on the Wnu River in 1892.
And in 1860 at the age of 25, Susanna Bear traveled
with Bishop Lia on a waiting ship, uh,
from her home in Leon, France
to join his mission in Auckland with a need to serve Maori.
Uh, her motivation
and her commitment was to serve Maori first
and all those in need.
And this is what she committed her life to.
And this is, um, the legacy of her work is, is
where I stand today in the ongoing
sisters in Wellington and beyond.
Tolerance and Friendship were strategies of her mission
and her mode of engagement.
Um, inspired by the love of Christ, she served Maori
and she served Catholic and non-Catholic.
She served those all Craigs and Na
and created space, um, in a context
where there had been division, uh,
and in star contrast to the, uh, the violence
and the conflict, the colonial state, um,
and her legacy continues today.
We have a co-management model
and our institutional structures, uh,
at the Compassion Group.
Uh, we have a continued commitment to engage with and,
and to working as an organization to support those in need.
Um, the Sisters of Compassion are untypical congregation,
so they report directly to, to Rome.
Um, I don't speak for, um, the sisters as a congregation,
but I speak as part of an organization that is Catholic.
Uh, and that is outside of the structures
of the Catholic diocese in Wellington.
Uh, so I'm not speaking for believers
of the Catholic church per se, but maybe the Pope
and certainly not for the Pope.
Um, but I just want to yeah, express my, my support and, um,
and what privileges to stand with these, these people today.
Terrific.
Um, look, Kira now just
before we take questions, feel free, I notice you've got,
um, members of perhaps a school group here.
I'll be interested just to welcome them.
Um, if you'd like to just welcome the rest
of your group here who just,
We actually have a wire to, to support.
Is that all right? Not too long
At the, when would now or at the completion?
We'd like, maybe at the completion of the day.
Welcome to, um, conduct the WTA now.
Yeah, but we just, perhaps we just do our questions first
and then we'll, um, finish off, um, with the wta.
Um, just a question I have.
Um, I, as a member of an Irish Catholic family
that arrived here in the 1840s, um, we were always, uh,
taught that British po um, most of what he was trying
to achieve to ensure Catholics could be a Catholic religion,
could actually be practiced in New Zealand,
because up until then there was some
doubt that that would be the case.
Do I, that's not, so that is, is
that basically your understanding of what,
why Bishop Alia's intervention did take place at the time?
Or is perhaps that's, um, something that was handed down
and lost in the midst of
Time? There's, there's
no doubt in my mind that the, uh,
political, uh, schisms
that were operational in Europe had their, um,
outplay here in, in New Zealand.
I think that, um, it's very difficult
and probably, uh, not always, um, helpful for us to try
and get in the heads of people when they were
negotiating various things.
I think at the end of the day, uh, it's actually what,
where things landed
and actually, uh, extrapolating further from PO's request,
it landed wider
and more definitively than even he expected in terms
of receiving the assurance that kahar,
that Ka Rica native Ka Rica would be, uh, protected.
Uh, it actually reflected something of Hobson's, uh, uh,
mag Mag amenity towards the, the spirituality
of the nation at the time.
So I think it's important,
even though you've raised an interesting historiographical
question, that that is not probably central, uh,
to the decision that's before you,
but it's an interesting fact, nevertheless,
After my grandmother was correct, grandmother
The answer.
Alright, sorry. Yeah.
Um, KO
and, um, yeah, I don't mind what,
um, so just two questions.
I think you think you've answered one already, which is,
so the major motivation for this is to honor
the past, honor the, and get it right, not 'cause
because the question that I was going to ask
before your presentation today was, what,
what difference will this make if this
change gets recognized? And
Greg, that's where a lot of people leap
to in the first instance.
Yeah. Uh, in, in my view,
there actually hasn't been enough work, uh, in order
to actually ascertain what are the outcomes it's in.
It's really in some ways similar to
what I would call the main body of the,
of ity at the moment, the preamble
and the other three articles,
we are still actually discerning arguing.
What are the repercussions?
The first instance as I would inform people is that we need
to acknowledge it first
and we acknowledge that it's in the land.
It's a, it's a, a word of agreement,
it's a covenantal agreement that some acknowledge it as,
and then we have to then one around
what are the repercussions
because, uh, people have said, oh, this is this,
or, you know, already we have religious freedom, et cetera.
That's not the point. The point, as I've said already is,
did Hobson commit the crown to tki, uh,
the, the various faiths that were in the land?
So that for another day in terms of, uh,
what will the outcomes be?
Uh, can I ask Elia, we brown?
Thank you. Um, um, thank you for coming here
and bringing this interesting, um, apartheid to us.
I was, I have a couple of questions.
One is, do you see yourself bringing this issue forward
to the select committee will be hearing
the treaty principles?
Bill for my first question,
Cecilia, um, thank you for the question.
This, uh, this was actually brought up three years ago.
It's almost, I, I, as a theologian,
I would use the word providential
that it lands in our land at the time when we are having all
these discussions, uh, around finity
or the treaty, I see it as being an integral part
of the wider discussion that needs to be had
around the nation.
Just incidentally, as an aside, I spent the, the morning,
uh, uh, with Sir Jeffrey Palmer,
and we discussed the need to have a
very well-informed forum
or fora for this wider discussion on the treaty.
And we talked about the Royal Commission, for example.
So, but to get back to your question
around where does it fit?
This wasn't politically motivated in order to, you know,
use a side door to, to uh, approach this, uh, um,
the principles bill.
But I think that it's almost a wonderful coincidence
that it's arisen at the same time
that the nation is immersed, uh, within these discussions.
Does that answer your question?
It Does. I think it does.
And I have a completely different point.
Well, we'll go back then to Mr. Fleming then.
Um, so this is probably for pecker, uh,
'cause it's a, it's a, it's a legal one.
And, and I perhaps I should know the answer to this myself,
but what is, and given, I mean,
'cause what, what would be the, the actual legal
change required within the context
of our current constitutional slash parliamentary nature?
Like we, this is part of the conversation that we're having,
like where does actually sit?
So what is it that we would be actually changing?
So I'm imagining what is the, my mind's going straight
to the piece of legislation
that we'd be affecting through this parliament.
What, what is it that would actually be changing?
I'm not, um, I'm not sure I'm best placed
to speak in terms of the, the legal implications.
See, you might have a view, but,
but certainly the, the recognition in the same way
that the other, um, principles of ity are recognized,
that would be part of the same kind of,
But this isn't a principle though, is it?
This is actually an article. It's actually addition
Principles are drawn out of what this out, out
of the understanding of what, um, actually says.
But this is key. Like it's
not, we are not having a conversation.
We we're literally talking about a fourth
article of the treaty, right? There's
No direct step, right.
It would have to be, I think my sense would be
that it would be part of the wider conversation
that referenced in terms of,
But look, we, we, time wise, I think just to extrapolate,
where would you see this?
It is now oral.
Where would it be written, I think is what you're saying.
Where where would it appear?
And the next generation going
and looking at this, we are relying on the oral tradition.
Where would it be written down?
Well, in my view, there's still a lot of discussion
that needs to be had legislatively, constitutionally
around the relationship of principles to Tutu.
And we're actually in the midst of, that's what's emerging,
um, around the MOTU and here in this house today.
But I would agree with what Rebecca's saying
that wherever Parliament ultimately lands in terms of
what constitutional place does, uh,
ity have within the legislative framework, that the fourth
or the oral article needs to be acknowledged in the same way
that the preamble is acknowledged as having, uh,
an effective outworking in terms of
legislation going forward
and responsibility of the Crown to enact that tiyaga.
So that's actually, you know, that's, that's a work
to be done, but that it would sit within the same body
of legislative framework, uh, that the principles, uh,
and was it 87, uh, came at the state owned enterprises, um,
That, that's a useful answer to finish on
because I think, I'm sorry, we, we,
we could probably still be here at,
uh, seven o'clock tonight. Yeah,
You gonna invite me back?
Well, what we will do now, we, we will be considering this
because I mean, there's the whole,
we haven't even got near the, um,
the French designs on New Zealand part of this as well.
Yep. Um, so, um,
but what we'll do, the committee will now, um, have
to take this and we, we, we'll discuss this
and if there is any further we need it may well be,
we do need to come back to you.
So look, thank you and I understand now, um, we uh, got time
for a always time for
thank you for Thank you.
So we, we could, we could easily still be here tomorrow
and still be learning.
Thank, thank you for that. Uh, beautiful water.
Oh, I don't, sorry. You see, we were well over time.
Yeah, yeah. No, I'm done. Right.
We'll go to item four, petition of Shari Baker
Shari's coming in line, I think.
Here we go. We've got, uh, Shari there.
Kira Kato. Yeah.
Yeah. Kira Shari. Um, welcome.
You heard our introductions the previously, um,
for the previous submission.
Yes. Alright, so, oh, we just, uh, we have had one change.
Celia Wade, um, brown is now here,
Kira.
Okay. 10 minutes.
Um, take your petition as read, but feel free to speak to it
and be appreciate any time for questions afterwards.
Cool. Um, thanks again for the opportunity
to present today, um,
on the issues facing the disability community following the
March 18th, um, announcement, as well as everything
that's come in between.
Um, as a parent of autistic children
and a member of the disability community, myself,
I'm not here just for my own family,
but on behalf of countless others
who've been deeply affected by these changes, um,
the independent review
of disability support services highlights major systemic
issues within FA Kaha.
Um, but I must emphasize
that the report does not fully address the real world
concerns of disabled individuals and their caregivers.
Um, so it's, it's impacted in several ways.
Um, they've severely restricted
how families can use respite funding
under the new guidelines.
Families are now limited to purchasing portable sensory
items or tablets only like iPads.
Um, these items can be beneficial for some disabled people,
um, but for others it can actually be detrimental.
Um, and the limitation is extremely rigid
and fails to address the full range
of needs within the disability community.
My children, um, have become more dysregulated with tablets,
but what choice do I have?
My previous forms of respite that
provided myself with respite as well as my partner, um,
and well as well as my children
with respite are not able to be funded.
Now I cannot work full time due to my children's needs.
And the only able, I'm re the only reason I'm able
to work at all is because my husband works from home.
Um, because we both need to be available
for our kids' high needs.
My husband spent five months unemployed this year
because he needed a job
where he could work from home and still be available.
And this is the situation we are in,
and that's just one family.
Before these changes, we have flexibility
to purchase essential tools, sensory items, trampolines,
sensory swings, blackout tents.
Um, these aren't items that we necessarily purchased,
but we had the flexibility to if we needed to.
Um, and that created calm environments
for those with sensory needs.
These items are crucial for many families, um, particularly
who require portable
and non-mobile supports to manage their behaviors
and reduce anxiety.
I can name many purchases that have been invaluable
for our autistic autistic children
and our family's wellbeing, but I'll give you one example.
One of my autistic children cannot feel temperature.
They would shower with the water as hot as it would go
if they weren't supervised
because they enjoyed the sensory experience of the steam.
Often they would come out of the shower with scolded skin
and we couldn't let our child safely shower independently.
My child was in the stages of puberty
and found it incredibly uncomfortable to have me
as her carer in the room while she showered,
checking everything and making sure the
water temperature wasn't changed.
Her dignity was absolutely compromised.
Shortly after the Ministry of Health allowed funding
to be flexible, we were able
to install a lockable water temperature
controller for hot water.
We used individualized funding to purchase and install this,
and it made significant impacts in our household.
We could set a safe temperature for her to shower
and she could still turn the shower handle
to be all the way warm,
get steam without the water scolding her.
She's now able to retain her
dignity while she's in the shower.
And this meets the enabling Good Life principles.
This is an example of a purchase
that would be considered an extra
or ordinary cost to some people,
but was a life-changing disability support to us
and not something that would've been funded elsewhere
in any other departments.
Furthermore, families were previously able to cover costs
for respite, like staying in a hotel
or providing their cares to come along
with them and stay in a hotel.
And that's changed as well.
So disabled individuals can no longer use their funding
to pay for a care to travel
with them when going out of region.
For disabled people who need Constant Care,
this change severely restricts their ability to travel
for medical appointments, specialist services,
or even family visits.
Um, the care is support rates.
Um, I would consider exploitative, um, $80
for 24 hours of care is ridiculous.
The rate's shockingly low
and you're never gonna attract proper carers who can care
for disabled people at that rate.
Um, I know there's other ways to be funded for
respite or for personal cares, et cetera,
but I just wanted to add that in there
because, um, it's disgustingly low.
Um, the report also, this is the independent review,
acknowledges that fa kaha is under immense financial
pressure, but it fails to recognize the real emotional
and mental toll these changes have on caregivers.
Rural families are also affected disproportionately
where they can't get cares
or they can't get access to specialist services
and would have to travel at great lengths.
There's also negative impacts on specialist
services, public services.
They keep telling us that there's public services available
and there realistically is not.
I'd be really interested to see the amount of people
who get referrals to specialist services, such
as occupational therapy, speech language therapy,
and how many actually get accepted
and how many get declined.
Um, my children, they need occupational therapy,
they need psychologists, but everything is a coaching model.
And we used to previously be able to use our funding
to have one-on-one support, which we cannot access publicly.
I can't be a psychiatrist, psychologist,
occupational therapist, speech language therapist,
behavioral therapists, pediatrician, dietician, a teacher
as well as a parent.
It's not possible. I can't be all those things
to my children and I'm not the only one person saying this.
Professionals as well as other carers say this according
to the Carers report,
it completely undermines the enabling Good Lives principle.
And most alarmingly is the lack of consultation that was,
had these changes happened overnight without any
consultation, um, to the dis disability community.
And, um, that is probably the most,
has caused the most mistrust for us
as the disabled community, um, between us
and any part of the government to be honest.
Um, because we don't know what's going
to change overnight anymore.
Um, they should have, if they wanted to
take away those changes
or reverse them in a way,
they should have consulted people and given them notice.
Um, they say it wasn't because of finances,
but they can say that all they want.
It clearly was. Um, so
what I would like is for the previous guidelines to be
reinstated while a proper process is followed
where they engage in proper consultation, um, with
agencies, care agencies, um,
and the disabled people themselves
and preserve the enabling good life approach.
Um, the changes to the funding have caused immeasurable harm
to families like mine.
The flexibility we had allowed us to provide the best care
for our loved ones while maintaining our mental
and physical wellbeing.
Without it, many families are at the risk
of burnout if they aren't already.
Um, ours is definitely on that side of being burnt out.
Um, and this affects the disabled cares,
the disabled individuals that we provide care for.
Um, and in turn, all of society will suffer, um,
if we can't work
and we can't do the things we would normally do.
Thank you. I'm open to any questions.
Alright, thank you Sherry. Uh, Celia,
Thank you so much for taking the time out
of your very busy time to present to us.
Um, I was really wanting to explore the suddenness
of the change of Phi Kaha practice
and how you feel that relates to what's a common motto
amongst the disabled communities?
Nothing about us without us.
Yep. And how, if you could respond to that, please.
Yep. It's absolutely, um, devastating.
It took everyone by complete surprise, especially
because I think it was the year prior, um,
or maybe it was six months beforehand,
Phi Kaha said flexibility was here to stay.
And it was probably six months
before that that I was telling my family in Canada
that we have the most progressive disabled funding,
um, in the world.
And going from that to we are now completely the opposite
and we have really restrictive funding, um,
and restrictive access to specialist services.
Um, so we weren't consulted at all.
Um, and it came as a huge shock to everybody
that this could even happen.
And there were no checks and balances in place that like,
how can something like this happen just overnight without a
lead up, without consultation, without, you know,
there's no, um, checks
and balances in these departments, which is problematic.
Uh, Mr. Bates,
Thank you chair, and, uh, thank you
for the time you've taken to present to, uh, the committee
and agree with you.
I I, I wonder how, uh, this happened
and we got to a place where, uh, FHA had overspent so much,
uh, in the previous government had
allowed that to run so far.
My question is, how, uh,
has the disability community responded
to the government's commitment, uh, record commitment
of an increase in the disability, uh, budget
of $1.1 billion, uh, over the forecast period
for the current year's budget?
I think it's mostly just a moot point.
Like, we won't see the money,
we won't be able to use the money.
And it's become, um, very clear.
You're saying that Fika has, has, was projected
to overspend, but how many times did we hear over and over
and over again the restrictions
that were being put in place Were not
because of finances, that is what we were told.
So the disabled community has completely lost all trust
because you can say, oh, we're gonna put $1 billion.
We, we don't know that that is gonna be managed properly.
And we don't actually have any say right now
in anything that's been happening.
Um, so it's, it's just completely a moot point.
I think there's a lot of industries
that wouldn't consider $1.1 million going towards
The industries. Mo Yeah. Um,
Mr. Fleming,
Um, yeah, Kia, um, Kia Shari, uh, I,
um, in the, the, the electorate that I, um, in e MP four
for, for a number of, uh, number of charities that work
with stable disabled community.
And so you can imagine since April I've done
quite a bit of advocacy.
Um, what I've done is, is advocated on individual basis and,
and in, and in most of the cases, um, have been able to work
through, um, the flexibility that's required.
Have you, have, you has your local MP
or have you been able to work
with your local MP in your particular case to achieve that?
Because I I, I'm, I'm really, really sorry for what you
and your family, uh, experiencing.
Um, if you were my local constituent,
I'd certainly be looking to see whether I could
help you navigate that.
Um, yes, we, we have been in contact with our local mp,
but at the end of the day there's very clear guidelines set,
set out by Phi Kaha that they will not, um, bend.
So if it's about me, um, getting respite,
it's like literally me being kicked outta my house
and trying to wander the streets and figure out what to do.
Um, there, there just isn't like things like that
that they have any leeway over.
Um, and I'm not gonna put, you know,
a 6-year-old child in some kind of institution.
I don't even think that would exist here.
Um, to get some respite.
Um, you know, that would be obviously detrimental
to, to my children. Um,
Yeah. Right.
Okay. Sherry, just a question with enabling Good li with,
with enabling good lives.
Yeah. Would it be fair to say that when you have a
high in complex needs child
or dependent that actually without this assistance
it's very difficult to live a good life, not only
for the individual but for the family
and that that was where the enabling good lives actually
allowed families like yours to actually approach some sort
of normalcy that without that assistance it's not possible.
Would that be fair?
Absolutely fair. Um, there are families we know that have,
since the changes have not been able to even leave the house
together as a family, which they would've been able to
before because of various supports, um, and resources.
And the reality of living in New Zealand,
we're a small ki island.
Um, and there are not access to the specialist supports
that a lot of disabled people actually require.
Um, so these of course are kind of work
around enabling good lives solutions
to help them live their best life.
Despite that, um,
because we can't retain specialists,
everything is a cons consultative model, um,
which is not best practice.
Alright, Sherry, look, I'm afraid we've sort
of come run out of time for this,
but I think you've, um, done a very good service, not only
for you and your family, but for the whole community.
Um, that, uh, and I'll declare an interest.
I'm the father of a high and complex special needs son.
Mm-Hmm. So I do fully understand, um, how isolating, um,
life is with, uh, um, with such dependence.
So thank you very much for your courage.
Thank you for your time. Hmm.